## Vernacular language
The form of AAE that has been most studied is usually described as African American Vernacular English (AAVE). The term ‘vernacular’ has been used since the Middle Ages, first to describe local European languages (low prestige) in contrast to Latin (high prestige), then to characterize any non-standard spoken version of a language used by lower-status groups. So, the vernacular is a general expression for a kind of social dialect, typically spoken by a lower-status group, which is treated as ‘non-standard’ because of marked differences from a socially prestigious variety treated as the standard language. As the vernacular language of African Americans, AAVE shares a number of features with other non-standard varieties, including those called ‘Latino English’ (in the north and east) and ‘Chicano English’ (in the south and west), spoken in Hispanic American communities. Varieties of what has been called ‘Asian American English’ are also characterized by some of the pronunciation features described in studies of this vernacular.

## The sounds of a vernacular
A pervasive phonological feature in AAVE and other English vernaculars is the tendency to reduce final consonant clusters, so that words ending in two consonants (*left hand*) are often pronounced as if there is only one (*lef han*). This can affect the pronunciation of past-tense -ed forms in certain contexts, with expressions such as iced tea and I passed the test sounding like ice tea and I pass the tess. Initial dental consonants (*think, that*) are frequently pronounced as alveolar stops (*tink, dat*), with the result that the definite article (*the*) is heard as [də], as in You da man! Other morphological features, such as possessive -’s (*John’s girlfriend*) and third person singular -s (she loves him), are not typically used (*John girlfriend, she love him*). Also, when a phrase contains an obvious indication of plural number, the plural -s marker (*guys, friends*) is usually not included (*two guy, one of my friend*).

## The grammar of a vernacular
It is typically in aspects of grammar that AAVE and other vernaculars are most stigmatized as being ‘illogical’ or ‘sloppy’. One frequently criticized element is the double negative construction, as in *He don’t know nothin* or *I ain’t afraid of no ghosts*. Because the negative is expressed twice, these structures have been condemned as ‘illogical’ (since one negative supposedly cancels the other). Yet, this feature of AAVE can be found in many other English dialects and in other languages such as French: *il ne sait rien* (literally, ‘he not knows nothing’). It was also common in Old English: *Ic naht singan ne cuðe* (literally, ‘I not sing not could’). There is nothing inherently illogical about these structures, which can extend to multiple negatives, allowing greater emphasis on the negative aspect of the message, as in *He don’t never do nothin*. 
The ‘sloppy’ criticism focuses on the frequent absence of forms of the verb ‘to be’ (*are, is*) in AAVE expressions such as *You crazy* or *She workin now*. It may be more accurate to say that wherever are and is can be contracted in the casual style of other varieties (*You’re, She’s*), they are not articulated in AAVE. Formal styles of Standard English require are and is in such expressions, but many regional varieties do not. Nor do many other languages such as Arabic and Russian require forms of ‘to be’ in similar contexts. This feature of AAVE speech can’t be ‘sloppy’ any more than it would be ‘sloppy’ in normal Arabic or Russian speech. 
While AAVE speakers don’t include the auxiliary verb is in expressions such as *She workin now*, to describe what is happening currently, they can use be (not is), as in *She be workin downtown now*, as a way of expressing habitual action.
That is, the presence or absence of *be* distinguishes between what is a recurring activity or state and what is currently happening. To talk about a habitual action that started or happened in the past, AAVE uses *bin* (typically stressed), not *was*, as in *She bin workin there*. In effect, the use of habitual *be* or *bin*, and the absence of forms of ‘to be’ in present state expressions, are all consistent features in the grammar of AAVE. The negative versions of these verbs are formed with *don’t* (not *doesn’t*) and the verb is not used with a contracted negative. So, in AAVE, *She don’t be workin* is grammatical, whereas *She doesn’t be workin* and *She ben’t workin* would be considered ungrammatical. 
In this discussion, we have focused on the linguistic features of social dialects. Yet, the groups who use those dialects are not only distinguished by the language they use, but by more general factors such as beliefs and assumptions about the world and their experience of it. This is usually discussed in terms of ‘culture’, the subject of the next chapter.


